<!-- PAGE: 1 -->

Health Research Alliance
Member Organization Author Manuscript
J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.
Published in final edited form as:
J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). <DATE>; 139(5): 1357–1366. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00775.2025.
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Biomarkers of organ stress and injury following the Boston
Marathon
<PERSON><sup>1,2,3,*</sup>, <PERSON><sup>4,*</sup>, <PERSON><sup>1</sup>, <PERSON><sup>5</sup>, <PERSON><sup>5</sup>, <PERSON><sup>5</sup>, <PERSON><sup>5</sup>, <PERSON><sup>6</sup>, <PERSON><sup>5</sup>
<sup>1</sup>Department of Health, Human Performance and Recreation, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville,
Arkansas, United States
<sup>2</sup>Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas,
Dallas, Texas, United States
<sup>3</sup>Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, United States
<sup>4</sup>Department of Health, Exercise and Sports Sciences, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
New Mexico, United States
<sup>5</sup>Heat and Hydration Optimization (H2O) Lab, Exercise Science Research Center, Department
of Health, Human Performance and Recreation, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas,
**United States**
<sup>6</sup>Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States
Health Research Alliance Author <PERSON>
Abstract
We examined the changes in blood and urine-based biomarkers of organ stress/injury and
hydration before and after the <DATE> Boston Marathon. Our primary aims were to compare
responses between males and females, and euhydrated and hypohydrated runners. Seventy-two
runners (34 males/38 females; <math>50 \pm 11</math<DATE>; finish time <math>3.45 \pm 0.32</math> h:min) had blood and/or
urine samples taken before and after the race. Average temperature on a race day was <math>19 \pm 3^{\circ}</math>C,
and relative humidity was <math>47 \pm 15\%</math>. Samples were assayed for markers of hydration, intestinal
injury (intestinal fatty acid binding protein and soluble cluster of differentiation 14), skeletal
muscle damage (creatine kinase), and acute kidney injury (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase
2, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, kidney
injury molecule-1, creatinine). Markers of hydration were elevated from pre- to postrace, but only
25%-34% of runners were deemed hypohydrated postrace. All markers of organ stress/injury
nuscript
Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution CC-BY-NC 4.0
Correspondence: B. P. McDermott (<EMAIL>).
<PERSON> and <PERSON> contributed equally to this work.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Z.J.M., W.C.A., C.L.B., and <PERSON> conceived and designed research; Z.J.M., W.C.A., C.L.B., X.Z., A.K.M., R.P., S.C.W., S.G., and
B.P.M. performed experiments; Z.J.M., W.C.A., C.L.B., and B.P.M. analyzed data; Z.J.M., W.C.A., C.L.B., and B.P.M. interpreted
results of experiments; <PERSON> prepared figures; Z.J.M., W.C.A., and B.P.M. drafted manuscript; Z.J.M., W.C.A., C.L.B., X.Z.,
A.K.M., R.P., S.C.W., S.G., and <PERSON> edited and revised manuscript; <PERSON>, W.C.A., C.L.B., X.Z., A.K.M., R.P., S.C.W., S.G., and
B.P.M. approved final version of manuscript.
DISCLOSURES
No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors.

<!-- PAGE: 2 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 2
were increased postrace (fold change: 1.3–1455; <math>P \le 0.007</math> for all indices); however, there were
no differences based on sex or hydration status (<math>P \ge 0.099</math> for all indices). Our findings show
that the Boston Marathon produces a significant level of stress on the gastrointestinal and renal
organ systems and that these effects do not appear to be modulated by biological sex. In addition,
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
our findings suggest that the substantial increases in markers of kidney and intestinal barrier
injury persist even when severe hypohydration is prevented, suggesting that during the marathon,
maintaining hydration cannot fully offset the risk for organ injury. These findings should be
considered when designing interventions to minimize gastrointestinal and renal-related health
complications associated with marathon running to promote both health and performance in
recreational, but completive marathon runners.
# NEW & NOTEWORTHY
We show that the Boston Marathon produces a significant level of stress on the gastrointestinal
and renal organ systems, but these effects do not appear to be modulated by biological sex or age.
Furthermore, the substantial rise in the markers of kidney and intestinal barrier injury persisted
despite runners mitigating severe hypohydration. These findings may be useful for identifying
interventions aimed at minimizing acute health complications associated with marathon running.

Keywords
endurance; exercise; marathon; organ injury

INTRODUCTION
The marathon is a popular endurance event often regarded as the pinnacle of performance
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
for endurance athletes. In general, the exercise training required to complete a
marathon elicits numerous positive physiological benefits including improved metabolic,
cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal health ultimately contributing to enhanced health and
life span (1, 2). However, the prolonged exertion that occurs during a marathon event
itself provides a significant acute stress that has the potential to cause pathophysiological
responses in several organ systems (2). For example, acute cardiovascular, renal,
gastrointestinal, and musculoskeletal disturbances have been documented in runners during
marathon events (3-6). Although these alternations are most commonly transient and resolve
without treatment, they have the potential to impact race performance and overtime may lead
to negative health consequences. Thus, a comprehensive understanding of the contributing
risk factors to the pathophysiological responses to marathon running is crucial to improve
both performance and health of runners.
One of the most profound physiological responses to endurance exercise is the systemic
alteration in blood flow. During exercise, perfusion to the working skeletal muscle is
increased to support aerobic energy demand (7). This hemodynamic response is primarily
mediated via local factors in the muscle that reduce vascular resistance as well as large
increases in cardiac output. In addition, other vascular beds, such as the splanchnic and
renal vascular beds, increase resistance to maintain adequate blood pressure (8). These
hemodynamic changes can lead to splanchnic and renal hypoperfusion that may contribute

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 3 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 3
to acute organ injury and thereby compromise essential organ system function (9-11).
Furthermore, increased core temperature and dehydration associated with high levels of
metabolic heat production and/or high environmental heat load exacerbate these responses as
blood is sent to the skin to increase heat dissipation (12). In the gut, both hypoperfusion and
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
hyperthermia can lead to intestinal barrier injury (9, <DATE>), which may manifest as symptoms
of gastrointestinal distress (i.e., nausea, bloating, and diarrhea) and perhaps contribute
to more severe clinical complications such as exertional heat stroke (14). Likewise,
dehydration, hyperthermia, and reduced renal perfusion during exercise can lead to transient
increases in acute kidney injury risk (15). Although both intestinal barrier integrity and renal
stress may contribute to the pathophysiological responses during marathon running, less is
known about the specific roles of relevant biological factors, such as sex, that may make
individuals more susceptible to increased risk for intestinal barrier injury and acute kidney
injury risk.
The role of biological sex on gastrointestinal and renal responses to marathon running is not
well established. Regarding the gastrointestinal responses, previous data are equivocal with
some survey studies showing that female athletes report higher rates of exercise-induced
gastrointestinal symptoms than their male counterparts (16), and others reporting no sex
differences during endurance training (17). Furthermore, laboratory-based studies with high
experimental control have provided no evidence of sex differences on gastrointestinal
responses to endurance exercise (18), though these observations require confirmation in
the field, where external validity is higher. Interestingly, experimental data indicate that
females may be more resistant to ischemia-reperfusion-induced intestinal injury compared
with males (19), and females appear to have a lower rise in biomarkers of end-organ
damage following exertional heat stroke (20). Thus, there is some evidence to suggest
that females may be protected against exercise-induced organ stress/injury. In support of
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
this, observational studies suggest that males may be at increased risk for heat-related
acute kidney injury, though the mechanisms underlying this potential difference are not
understood (21, <DATE>). We have previously shown that hydration behaviors and status may
differ based on sex, which could lead to differences in both intestinal barrier and acute
kidney injury responses (23). Given that females contribute to substantial number of
marathon runners worldwide along with paucity of data on females following marathon
events, there is a critical need to investigate the role of sex on these responses.
The Boston Marathon provides a unique natural laboratory to investigate these physiological
responses, given its historical variability in environmental conditions, competitive field, and
diverse population of runners. The Boston Marathon produces overall faster times compared
with other races due to strict qualifying standards. Furthermore, since the course is downhill
for the initial 16 km, muscle damage is inherent, which further increases the risk for
acute kidney injury (24). We have previously shown consistent elevations in the markers
of intestinal cell injury and acute kidney injury, with incomplete recovery 24 h following
running (23, <DATE>). However, the lack of baseline (i.e., prerace) data in our previous study
makes it difficult to interpret the cross-race changes in these markers. Understanding the
extent of gastrointestinal symptoms and the corresponding biomarker res-ponses during a
competitive marathon setting, as well as the role that sex plays in these responses, may

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 4 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 4
provide critical insights into strategies for mitigating exercise-induced organ injury and
optimizing endurance performance.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine changes in blood and urine-based
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
biomarkers of organ stress and injury before and after the Boston Marathon. In addition,
we compared responses between male and female runners to better understand the influence
of sex on these responses. We also analyzed blood and urine samples for markers of
hydration to determine the potential impacts of race-induced hypohydration on markers
of end-organ injury/stress. Finally, we used secondary analyses to explore the impact
of age (e.g., young vs. middle aged vs. older adults) and race finish time on baseline
to postrace responses. We hypothesized that biomarkers of organ stress/injury would be
elevated postrace regardless of sex, but that responses would be augmented in runners
who became hypohydrated. The findings from this study may inform interventions aimed
at minimizing pathophysiological complications associated with marathon running and
enhancing endurance exercise tolerance in both recreational and elite athletes.
# METHODS
Registered <DATE> Boston Marathon runners were invited via an email sent by Boston Athletic
Association race organizers to participate in this study. Interested runners contacted the
study team and were sent a health history screening questionnaire to determine eligibility.
Inclusion criteria required participants to have no previous vasovagal response during blood
draws, be above <DATE>, and had qualified to run the Boston Marathon based on
age standards. Individuals were excluded if they had current cardiovascular, respiratory,
gastrointestinal, bleeding, inflammatory, metabolic, fluid-electrolyte disorder, or other
chronic disease. Individuals using selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors, anti-hypertensives,
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
or other medications that affect kidney, gastrointestinal, or cardiovascular function, or fluidelectrolyte balance were excluded. Elite runners and nonqualifying runners (e.g., charity
runner) were not included in the study due to the large variability in potential finish times.
This study was approved by the University of Arkansas Institutional Review Board, and
participants provided written informed consent before participation in the study.
On <DATE> preceding the race, during athlete check-in at the Marathon Expo,
participants reported to a designated research area for baseline data collection. After arrival
and check-in, participants completed a research questionnaire, medical history form, and
a baseline blood sample was collected. Baseline blood samples were collected during the
Marathon Expo to avoid logistical concerns with collecting blood samples immediately
before the start of the race (i.e., time constraints with collecting a large number of
blood samples in a short period of time). Researchers provided verbal instructions for the
procedures of data collection and familiarized participants with the research areas at both the
start and finish lines. Researchers were available to answer any questions regarding study
procedures for race day. Participants were provided with a paper copy of reminders.
On <DATE>, participants reported to a designated research area in Hopkinton (near the start
line) to provide a baseline urine sample. Immediately after completing the race, participants
reported to the designated research area located in the medical tent near the finish line. The

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 5 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 5
participants were asked to complete a brief postmarathon survey to assess symptomology
and provide a urine and blood sample.
Gastrointestinal symptoms experienced during the race were assessed immediately postrace
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
using a standardized recall questionnaire. Runners scored the symptoms experienced during
the race on a 10-point scale (<math>0 = \text{no problems}</math> at all and <math>9 = \text{the worst}</math> it has ever been).
Questions included those specific to upper (reflux/heart burn, belching, bloating, stomach
pain/cramps, vomiting, and nausea) and lower abdominal problems (intestinal cramps,
flatulence, urge to defecate, left and right abdominal pain/stitch, loose stool, and diarrhea).
These 13 questions were summed to provide a total gastrointestinal symptom score with
a maximum score of 117. In addition, the questionnaire contained questions about other
systemic problems such as dizziness, headache, muscle cramps, urge to urinate, thirst, fever,
swelling, fatigue, muscle soreness/weakness, and tingling in arms or legs.
Sample Analysis
At pre- and postrace, participants were provided with a sealed urine sample cup and
instructed to go to a nearby restroom to collect a sample. Urine samples were aliquoted,
and we measured urine specific gravity shortly after collection (within <DATE> h) using a
refractometer according to the manufacturer's instructions (Master-Sur; Atago company
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Remaining aliquots were stored at <math>-80^{\circ}</math>C for later analyses. In
addition, blood samples were collected through venipuncture of an arm vein into heparin,
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), or serum separator Vacutainers in the seated
upright position following at least 10 min of seated rest at the Marathon Expo (baseline)
and at after race completion (postrace). Whole blood was analyzed immediately with i-STAT
CHEM 8+ cartridges (Abbott Laboratories, IL) and then placed on ice and transferred to a
local laboratory for centrifugation and storage. Blood samples were centrifuged within 2 h
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
of collection to isolate plasma/serum, and aliquots were stored at -80°C for later analyses.
<PERSON> urine and blood samples were shipped <DATE> on dry ice to the laboratory for
follow-up analyses.
<PERSON> urine and plasma samples were thawed and briefly vortexed, and osmolality was
assessed in duplicate using a single-sample freeze point osmometer (Model 3250; Advanced
Instruments, Norwood, MA). To assess muscle damage, we measured serum creatine kinase
(CK) (Medica RA chemistry analyzer). We measured plasma (heparin) intestinal fatty acid
binding protein [I-FABP; intraassay coefficient of variation (CV) = 5%; 50-fold dilution]
and plasma (EDTA) soluble cluster of differentiation 14 (sCD14; intraassay CV = 4%;
350-fold dilution) using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (R&D Systems, Minneapolis,
MN). I-FABP, a cytosolic protein present in mature enterocytes located in the duodenum/
jejunum, was used to detect intestinal cell injury. sCD14 was used as an indirect marker of
microbial translocation, as this protein is involved in the trafficking of lipopolysaccharides to
immune cells. Plasma and serum biomarkers were corrected for changes in plasma volume
(26).
Frozen urine samples were assayed for tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2 (TIMP-2;
intraassay CV = 3%; 50-fold dilution) and insulin like growth factor binding protein 7
(IGFBP7; intraassay CV = 4%; 25-fold dilution) (RayBiotech Life, Peachtree Corners, GA),

<PERSON> (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 6 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 6
as well as neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL; intraassay CV = 14%; 20-fold
dilution) and kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1; intraassay CV = 13%; twofold dilution)
via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). TIMP-2 and
IGFBP7 are cell cycle arrest proteins, NGAL is released from kidney tubular cells under
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
stress, and KIM-1 marker is released from the proximal tubule under stress; thus, these
values were used to indicate acute kidney injury risk. The arithmetic product of TIMP-2 and
IGFBP7 (TIMP-2 × IGFBP7) was used as the primary indication for acute kidney injury
risk. Urinary biomarkers were normalized to urine specific gravity using the Levine-Feyh
equation with a reference urine specific gravity of 1.020 to account for potential changes in
urine concentration (27).
Statistical Analyses
Before statistical analyses, data were assessed to confirm that they met model assumptions
(i.e., normality and equality of variance), and the data were inspected for influential data
points. Due to a variety of factors, we were unable to obtain a sufficient quantity of blood
or urine at baseline or postrace for some participants. Since these missing data were missing
at random, they were excluded from final analyses, and the number of participants included
for each variable is indicated in text, tables, and figures, where appropriate. We compared
baseline or prerace and postrace data using paired sample t tests (two-tailed). We used
unpaired t tests (two-tailed) to compare responses between males and females, as well as
between euhydrated and hypohydrated runners. Blood and urine markers of hydration were
analyzed using linear mixed-effects models with main effects of time (within factor) and
sex (between factor; males vs. females) or hydration status (between factor; euhydrated vs.
hypohydration). To explore the impact of age (young adults: <DATE>; middle aged: 40-59
yr; and older adults: ≥60 <DATE>) on the baseline or prerace to postrace change in biomarkers,
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
we performed secondary grouped analyses using one-way ANOVA (or <PERSON>'s ANOVA
in the case of unequal variances). We chose to categorize age in <DATE> increments to
allow for a sufficient number of runners in each age group, whereas still characterizing
individuals as young, middle aged, or older aligning closely with the Boston Marathon
age group qualifying times. We compared symptoms reported during the race by males
and females and euhydrated and hypohydrated runners using the nonparametric Wilcoxon
signed-ranked tests (two-tailed). In addition, we explored the relations between finish time
and organ stress and injury markers as well as gastrointestinal symptoms and markers of
intestinal barrier injury using simple linear regressions. Statistical analyses were performed
in Prism 10 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA). Data in text, tables, and figures are
presented as means ± standard deviations and [minimum-maximum], where appropriate.
Data analyzed using nonparametric tests are shown as median [minimum-maximum].
Statistical significance was set a priori to <math>P < 0.05</math>. Clinical significance was set as follows:
for IFABP to a change from baseline to postrace >1,000 pg/mL (28); for IGFBP7 ×
TMIP2, clinical significance was set as a postrace value >0.30 (ng/mL)<sup>2</sup>/1,000 (29); and for
creatinine a change of 0.30 mg/dL. (30). In addition, hydration status was evaluated using
the following criteria to determine hypohydration: urine specific gravity > 1.020 and/or
plasma osmolality > 300 <PERSON>/kgH<sub>2</sub>O (31, <DATE>).

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 7 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 7
# RESULTS
Participants and Race Conditions
A total of 72 runners (34 males and 38 females) completed this study. However, we were
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
only able to collect and analyze complete (i.e., baseline or prerace and postrace) blood
and/or urine samples on a total of 60 participants. The specific sample sizes for each variable
are shown in the tables/figures. Participant characteristics including age, height, weight, and
race finish time are shown in Table 1. Average age was <math>34 \pm <DATE> (7 males and 11 females)
for the young cohort, <math>55 \pm 2</math> yr (13 males and 21 females) for the middle-aged cohort, and
<math>64 \pm 3</math> yr (14 males and 6 females) for the older cohort. Female race finish time was ~9%
longer compared with males (<math>P = 0.015</math>). Environmental conditions reported <DATE> in
Boston, MA, on the race day are shown in Table 2. The average air temperature on the race
day was <math>19 \pm 3</math> °C, relative humidity was <math>47 \pm 15</math>%, which collectively yielded an estimated
wet bulb temperature of <math>12 \pm 1</math> °C and heat index of <math>18 \pm 3</math> °C.
**Markers of Hydration Status**
Detailed markers of hydration and electrolyte balance are shown in Table 3. We noted pre-to
postrace changes in blood sodium (1 <math>\pm</math> 3 mEq/L), chloride (2 <math>\pm</math> 4 mEq/L), ionized calcium
<math>(-0.1 \pm 0.1 \text{ mmol/L})</math>, plasma osmolality <math>(6 \pm 8 \text<PERSON>/kgH}_2\text{O})</math>, and urine specific gravity
<math>(0.008 \pm 0.016 \text{ AU})</math> (main effects of time: <math>P < 0.001</math> for all indices; Table 3). Males had
higher overall blood sodium (main effect of sex: <math>P = 0.046</math>) and plasma osmolality (main
effect of sex: <math>P = 0.008</math>) compared with females. Twenty-five percent of runners (8 males
and 10 females) had a postrace urine specific gravity >1.020, and 34% of runners (16 males
and 8 females) had a postrace plasma osmolality >300 mosmol/kgH2O.
Markers of Acute Kidney Injury Risk
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Urinary biomarkers of acute kidney injury are shown in <PERSON>. 1, whereas blood-based markers
of renal stress are shown in Table 3. There were pre- to postrace increases in urine TIMP-2
<math>\times</math> IGFBP7 [<math>\Delta</math>18 ± 29 (ng/mL)<sup>2</sup>/1,000; <math>P</math>< 0.001], NGAL (<math>\Delta</math>29 <DATE> ng/mL; <math>P</math>< 0.001),
and KIM-1 (<math>\Delta 2.5 \pm 2.5</math> ng/mL; <math>P < 0.001</math>). However, there were no differences in the preto postrace changes between males and females or between euhydrated and hypohydrated
runners for urinary markers of acute kidney injury (Fig. 1). Likewise, exploratory analyses
showed no differences between young, middle aged, and older adults (Fig. 2). Creatinine and
blood urea nitrogen increased from baseline to postrace (main effects of time: <math>P < 0.001</math>),
and as expected, both creatinine and blood urea nitrogen were higher in males compared
with females (main effects of sex: <math>P < 0.001</math>; Table 3). Fifty-three of the 60 (88%) runners
with urine samples included in this study had a postrace TIMP-2 × IGFBP7 above the
0.30 (ng/mL)<sup>2</sup>/1,000 threshold, and 64 of the 67 (96%) runners with blood samples showed
baseline to postrace increases in creatinine ≥0.30 mg/dL. Race finish time did not predict the
change in TIMP-2 × IGFBP7 (<math>P = 0.825</math>), NGAL (<math>P = 0.298</math>), or KIM-1 (<math>P = 0.182</math>).
Markers of Intestinal Barrier Injury, Muscle Damage, and Symptoms
IFABP (<math>\Delta 4,379 \pm 4,566 \text{ pg/mL}</math>; <math>P < 0.001</math>), sCD14 (<math>\Delta 493 \pm 1,362 \text{ pg/mL}</math>; <math>P = 0.007</math>),
and creatine kinase (<math>\Delta 237 \pm 193 \text{ U/L}</math>; <math>P < 0.001</math>) all increased from baseline to postrace

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 8 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 8
(Fig. 3). However, there were no differences in the baseline to postrace changes between
males and females or euhydrated and hypohydrated runners (Fig. 3). Forty-five of the 60
runners in the study (75%) had baseline to postrace increases in IFABP >1,000 pg/mL.
Symptoms reported by runners during the race are summarized in Table 4. There were no
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
differences in the total gastrointestinal symptom score between males and females (P=
0.750) or between euhydrated and hypohydrated runners. Race finish time did not predict
the change in IFABP (<math>P = 0.872</math>), sCD14 (<math>P = 0.054</math>), or CK (<math>P = 0.907</math>). We did not observe
a linear relation between total gastrointestinal symptoms scores and the baseline to postrace
change in IFABP (<math>P = 0.138</math>) or sCD14 (<math>P = 0.522</math>).
DISCUSSION
The key findings from this study were as follows: I) there were substantial rises in several
markers of organ injury following the marathon indicating a significant level of stress on
the gastrointestinal and renal systems; 2) we observed no differences between male and
female responses for any of the measured variables adding to the growing body of evidence,
indicating that sex may not be a contributing factor to increases in organ stress observed
during endurance exercise; importantly, we highlight that our cohort is a representative of
competitive yet nonelite marathon runners; 3) contrary to previous reports, many runners
were able to successfully mitigate dehydration that resulted in only minor increases in urineand plasma-based markers of hydration with no significant electrolyte imbalances; 4) despite
this maintenance in hydration, runners still experienced substantial increases in markers of
acute kidney and intestinal barrier injury. In fact, there were no differences in biomarker
responses between runners who remained euhydrated and those who became hypohydrated
during the race. Thus, although hypohydration clearly plays a role in exacerbating acute
organ stress, maintaining hydration cannot fully offset risk for organ injury during a
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
marathon event; and 5) no clear differences were observed in biomarker responses between
young, middle aged, and older adults.
The baseline to postrace increases in markers of organ stress/injury is consistent with
previous data collectively showing that marathon running contributes to acute and likely
transient stress on the gastrointestinal and renal organ systems (23, <DATE>, 33-41). For
example, we previously reported elevated IFABP following the Boston Marathon, with
values decreasing 24 h postrace (25). However, since our previous study did not establish
baseline levels, we were unable to determine the acute impact of the marathon on these
responses. The current study extends upon those findings showing clear baseline to
postrace increases in IFABP and sCD14 that collectively indicate intestinal barrier injury.
However, we did not observe significant relations between markers of intestinal barrier
injury and reported symptomology, which corroborates previous field studies and suggests
that intestinal barrier injury may not be the driving cause of gastrointestinal symptoms
reported during endurance events (25, <DATE>). Furthermore, we report clear and consistent
rises in several markers of acute injury with values far exceeding the typical threshold
for clinical significance. For example, 88% of runners in this study had a TIMP-2 ×
IGFBP7 above the 0.30 (ng/mL)<sup>2</sup>/1,000 threshold postrace, and likewise 96% of runners
showed baseline to postrace increases in creatinine ≥0.30 mg/dL. Importantly, there appears
to be a good agreement between blood and urine-based markers of acute kidney injury

<PERSON> (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 9 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 9
risk, which suggests that these markers can be used in conjunction when assessing renal
stress following endurance exercise. The mechanisms underlying the increases in acute
kidney injury biomarkers are multifactorial but likely include hypoperfusion associated with
prolonged endurance exercise, hyperthermia secondary to metabolic heat production and
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
high environmental temperatures, hypohydration, and perhaps muscle damage associated
with sustained eccentric loading. Given the race conditions for this specific race and the
overall challenging Boston Marathon course, these responses may be on the higher end
compared with what may be observed in other races performed in cooler environments or
with less downhill running. Nonetheless, although we have previously shown that these
values mostly recover in the 24 h following the race (23, <DATE>), we emphasize that the acute
organ stress (both intestinal and kidney) should be considered during the recovery process,
especially when races are performed in warmer climates.
Previous studies have shown that males and females differ in their biomarker responses
to heat stroke and ischemia-reperfusion stress (19, <DATE>). Furthermore, epidemiological data
indicate that males have higher rates of heat-related acute kidney injury compared with
females (21, <DATE>). Although the underlying physiological mechanisms are not understood,
these previous studies have provided some evidence that females may be protected against
exercise- and/or heat-induced organ injury. Despite these reports, we revealed no sex-based
differences for any of the measured variables including in markers of hydration, intestinal
barrier injury, acute kidney injury, or skeletal muscle damage. Likewise, we did not observe
differences in subjective symptoms of gastrointestinal distress during the race. Our data
corroborate <PERSON>. (18), who found no sex differences in markers of intestinal barrier
injury following endurance exercise. Thus, it seems that sex may not be a primary factor to
the increases in organ stress observed during prolonged endurance exercise. Importantly, we
highlight that our study comprises a representative sample of males and female runners to
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
draw conclusions. For example, we studied a similar number of males and female runners,
who were of similar age range, as well as sex- and age-specific running time [i.e., consistent
with the literature females finish times were <math>\sim 10\%</math> longer than males (42)].
There is considerable variability in hypohydration rates following endurance events, perhaps
due to varying levels of experience or race finish times (23, <DATE>, <DATE>, <DATE>, <DATE>). Herein, we
report significant increases in pre- to postrace urine specific gravity and plasma osmolality,
but not urine osmolality. However, it is important to highlight that despite these significant
increases, all the measured hydration biomarkers still fell within the normal range postrace,
suggesting that runners experienced only mild, if any, levels of hypohydration. This was
somewhat surprising given that the environmental conditions on race day (i.e., average heat
index of <math>18 \pm 3</math>°C) were sufficient to induce a thermal challenge. Perhaps, our participants
were better equipped to handle cross-race dehydration (i.e., due to previous race experience).
Nonetheless, we show that runners still experienced increases in markers of acute kidney
injury risk regardless of their postrace hydration status. For example, we report substantial
increases in urinary TIMP-2 × IGFBP7, NGAL, and KIM-1, which collectively indicate
some level of transient kidney injury. In the context of fluid shifts, it is important to interpret
these biomarkers with potential changes in urine concentration. To account for this potential
confounding factor, we normalized urinary markers to urine specific gravity. Our findings
show that the substantial rises in all markers of kidney injury persisted after correcting for

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 10 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 10
changes in urine specific gravity, further demonstrating that the risk for kidney injury is
mediated by several contributing factors beyond severe hypohydration.
There are several pieces of practical information from this study that the scientific and
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
running community should consider moving forward. Although preventing dehydration is
clearly important for a variety of health and performance metrics, it does not fully prevent
the increase in these markers which is likely driven by sustained hypoperfusion and perhaps
hyperthermia. Thus, runners should consider recovery postrace to limit the repeated stress
on these organ systems. Our study provides no evidence that males and females respond
inherently different to the marathon. Likewise, we did not observe differences between
age groups, and our exploratory findings show that running time was not a significant
predictor of the biomarker responses postrace. Thus, individuals should consider their
unique physiology as there is not consistent evidence to suggest that recommendations
should be sex- or age-specific as these factors alone may not be a reliable determinant of
needs. A one-size-fits-all approach based on sex or age is insufficient and underscores the
important of individualized strategies. Furthermore, even in cases of mild or no apparent
hypohydration, we observed increases in measured biomarkers, suggesting that subtle fluid
deficits combined with the marathon imposes physiological stress. This raises the possibility
that without proactive and personalized fluid replacement strategies, greater or prolonged
increases in dehydration could lead to greater increases in these biomarkers.
This study was not without limitation. Baseline blood samples were not collected
immediately before the race; thus, day-to-day variation in the biomarkers may have some
impact on our results. Similarly, given that this study was conducted in the field, blood
and urine samples were processed as soon as it was logistically feasible (within ~2 h of
collection); however, we cannot rule out the potential for sample degradation due to delayed
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
sample processing, which may have underestimated the concentrations of some biomarkers
(e.g., sCD14). Although we provide a wide range of organ injury/stress biomarkers, we do
not have comprehensive physiological or nutrition data, which limit our ability to make
definitive conclusions regarding the mechanisms of organ injury. Although such data would
provide important insights, it is logistically challenging for a number of reasons including
cost and issues with participant adherence. However, considering the growing interest and
development in wearable biosensors, these data are becoming increasingly more realistic to
obtain in a wide range of runners. Likewise, we did not obtain comprehensive assessments
of training status or volume in <DATE> leading up to the race, nor were we able to
collect inter-race fueling and hydration metrics. These data would help determine if specific
prerace preparation (e.g., downhill or heat-focused training, etc.) or perhaps certain in-race
strategies (low vs. high carbohydrate fueling) could help mitigate the increase in these
biomarkers. Future work should explore these options when conducting similar field-based
studies.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that the Boston Marathon produces a significant
level of stress on the gastrointestinal and renal organ systems and that these effects do
not appear to be modulated by biological sex. In addition, our findings suggest that

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 11 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 11
the substantial increases in markers of kidney and intestinal barrier injury persist even
when severe hypohydration is prevented, suggesting that during the marathon, maintaining
hydration cannot fully offset risk for organ injury. These findings should be considered
when considering interventions aimed at minimizing various gastrointestinal and renalHealth Research Alliance Author Manuscript
related health complications associated with marathon running to promote both health and
performance in recreational, but completive marathon runners.
# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank <PERSON> and <PERSON> for their assistance with data collection. We thank <PERSON> and
<PERSON> for their assistance with postrace blood collection. We thank <PERSON> and the entire BAA
medical directors for facilitating logistics related to recruitment, parking, and lab space availability at the Expo,
start and finish lines. We thank Dr. <PERSON> for providing lab space for sample analysis and temporary
storage. Finally, we thank the athletes who participated in this study for their time and effort. Graphical Abstract
made with a licensed version of <URL>.

GRANTS
This study was funded by the Boston Athletic Association Medical Research Grant Program. <PERSON> was supported
by American Heart Association Grant (23POST1023065). W.C.A. was supported by American Heart Association
Grant (24POST1192222).
DATA AVAILABILITY
Data will be made available upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES
Predel HG. Marathon run: cardiovascular adaptation and cardiovascular risk. Eur Heart J 35: 3091–
3098, <DATE>. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/eht502. [PubMed: 24408890]
2. <PERSON>, Nikolaidis PT, Thuany M, Chlíbková D, Rosemann T, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Knechtle
Health Research Alliance Author <PERSON> and pathophysiology of marathon running: a narrative review. Sports Med Open 11:
10, <DATE>. doi:10.1186/s40798-025-00810-3. [PubMed: 39871014]
3. <PERSON>, Malhotra R, <PERSON>, d'Hemecourt P, Troyanos C, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Wang
TJ, <PERSON> WO, Thompson PD, <PERSON>; Race Associated Cardiac Arrest Event Registry
(RACER) Study Group. Cardiac arrest during long-distance running races. N Engl J Med 366:
130–140, <DATE>. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1106468. [PubMed: 22236223]
4. Martínez-Navarro I, <PERSON> A, <PERSON>, Hernando B, Panizo N, Hernando C. Muscle
cramping in the marathon: dehydration and electrolyte depletion vs. muscle damage. J Strength
Cond Res 36: 1629–1635, <DATE>. doi:10.1519/JSC.000000000003713. [PubMed: 32796418]
5. Hodgson LE, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Galloway R, <PERSON>, Sardat F, <PERSON>. Acute kidney injury
associated with endurance events-is it a cause for concern? A systematic review. BMJ Open Sport
Exerc Med 3: e000093, <DATE>. doi:10.1136/bmjsem-<PHONE>.
<PERSON>, <PERSON>, Davidson RJ. Faecal blood loss in response to exercise. Br Med J (Clin
Res Ed) 295: 303–305, <DATE>. doi:10.1136/bmj.<PHONE>.
7. <PERSON> of blood flow delivery to exercising skeletal muscle in humans. Am <PERSON> 62:
30E-35E, <DATE>. doi:10.1016/s0002-<DATE>.
8. <PERSON>, O'Leary DS. Reflex control of the circulation during exercise: chemoreflexes and
mechanoreflexes. <PERSON> (<DATE>) 69: 407-418, <DATE>. doi:10.1152/jappl.<PHONE>.
[PubMed: 2228848]
9. <PERSON>, Lenaerts K, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>. Exercise-induced
splanchnic hypoperfusion results in gut dysfunction in healthy men. PLoS One 6: e22366, <DATE>.
doi:10.1371/<PERSON>. [PubMed: 21811592]

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 12 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 12
Poortmans JR. Exercise and renal function. Sports Med 1: 125–153, <DATE>.
doi:10.2165/00007256-<DATE>. [PubMed: 6567229]
Bongers CCWG, Alsady M, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Eijsvogels TMH, <PERSON>, Hopman MTE.
Impact of acute versus prolonged exercise and dehydration on kidney function and injury. Physiol
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Rep 6: e13734, <DATE>. doi:10.14814/phy2.13734. [PubMed: 29890037]
12. <PERSON>. Exercise in a hot environment: the skin circulation. Scand J Med Sci Sports 20, Suppl
3: <DATE>. <PERSON>/j.1600-0838.2010.01206.x. [PubMed: 21029188]
13. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Amorim FT, Tonoli C, <PERSON> DD,
Coimbra CC. Association between exercise-induced hyperthermia and intestinal permeability: a
systematic review. Sports Med 47: <DATE>, <DATE>. doi:10.1007/s40279-016-0654-2. [PubMed:
27943148]
14. Lambert GP. Intestinal barrier dysfunction, endotoxemia, and gastrointestinal symptoms: the
"canary in the coal mine" during exercise-heat stress? Med Sport Sci 53: <DATE>.
doi:10.1159/000151550. [PubMed: 19208999]
15. <PERSON>, Johnson BD, <PERSON>, <PERSON> D, <PERSON>, Schlader ZJ. Both hyperthermia and
dehydration during physical work in the heat contribute to the risk of acute kidney injury. J Appl
Physiol (<DATE>) 128: 715–728, <DATE>. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00787.2019. [PubMed: 32078468]
16. ter Steege RW, <PERSON>, <PERSON>. Prevalence of gastrointestinal complaints in runners
competing in a long-distance run: an internet-based observational study in 1281 subjects. <PERSON> J
Gastroenterol 43: 1477–1482, <DATE>. doi:10.1080/00365520802321170. [PubMed: 18777440]
17. Wilson PB. Frequency of chronic gastrointestinal distress in runners: validity and reliability
of a retrospective questionnaire. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 27: 370–376, <DATE>. doi:10.1123/
ijsnem.2016-0305. [PubMed: 28253039]
18. <PERSON>, Costa RJS. Does biological sex impact intestinal epithelial injury, small intestine
permeability, gastrointestinal symptoms and systemic cytokine profile in response to exertionalheat stress? J Sports Sci 36: 2827–2835, <DATE>. doi:10.1080/02640414.2018.1478612. [PubMed:
29790452]
19. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Buurman WA, <PERSON>,
Lenaerts K. Females are more resistant to ischemia-reperfusion-induced intestinal injury than
males: a human study. Ann Surg 272: 1070–1079, <DATE>. doi:10.1097/SLA.000000000003167.
[PubMed: 30614877]
Health Research Alliance Author
20. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON> differences in
biomarkers of end-organ damage following exertional heat stroke in humans. J Appl Physiol
(<DATE>) 137: 1434–1445, <DATE>. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00463.2024. [PubMed: 39298615]
21. Schanz M, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Schricker S, Becker C, <PERSON>, <PERSON>-specific differences of renal heat tolerance in older adults during heat waves. Gerontology
68: 1018–1026, <DATE>. doi:10.1159/000520324. [PubMed: 34864733]
22. <PERSON>, So R, <PERSON>, Hong YC, Park M, <PERSON>, <PERSON>. Ambient temperature and hospital
admissions for acute kidney injury: a time-series analysis. Sci Total Environ 616-617: 1134–1138,
<DATE>. doi:10.1016/<URL>itotenv.2017.10.207. [PubMed: 29089137]
23. <PERSON>, Butts CL, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Emerson DM, RosaCaldwell ME, <PERSON>. Acute kidney injury biomarkers and hydration outcomes at the
Boston Marathon. Front Physiol 12: <MEDICAL_LICENSE_ID>, <DATE>. doi:10.3389/fphys.<PHONE>. [PubMed:
35046841]
24. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Lemmey AB, Walsh NP, Macdonald
JH. Exercising in a hot environment with muscle damage: effects on acute kidney injury
Manuscript
biomarkers and kidney function. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 305: <DATE>, <DATE>. doi:10.1152/
ajprenal.00091.2013. [PubMed: 23825078]
25. <PERSON>, Emerson DM, <PERSON>, Atkins WC, Butts CL, Laursen RM, Troyanos C,
<PERSON> A, Siedlik J. Gastrointestinal cell injury and perceived symptoms after running the
Boston Marathon. Front Physiol 14: 1268306, <DATE>. doi:10.3389/fphys.2023.1268306. [PubMed:
37908334]

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 13 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 13
26. <PERSON>, <PERSON>. Calculation of percentage changes in volumes of blood, plasma, and red cells
in dehydration. J Appl Physiol 37: 247–248, <DATE>. doi:10.1152/jappl.<PHONE>. [PubMed:
4850854]
27. <PERSON>, <PERSON> of urinary lead determinations. I. The significance of the specific
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
gravity. J Ind Hyg Toxicol 27: 217–223, 1945.
28. Costa RJS, <PERSON>, Kitic CM, Gibson PR. Systematic review: exercise-induced gastrointestinal
syndrome—implications for health and intestinal disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 46: 246–265,
<DATE>. doi:10.1111/apt.14157. [PubMed: 28589631]
29. <PERSON>, Al-Khafaji A, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Bagshaw SM, Bell M, et al. Discovery and
validation of cell cycle arrest biomarkers in human acute kidney injury. Crit Care 17: R25, <DATE>.
doi:10.1186/cc12503. [PubMed: 23388612]
30. Ostermann M, Bellomo R, Burdmann EA, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Goldstein SL, Kane-Gill SL,
<PERSON>, <PERSON>, Shaw AD, Srisawat N, Cheung M, Jadoul M, Winkelmayer WC, Kellum
JA; Conference Participants. Controversies in acute kidney injury: conclusions from a KIDNEY
DISEASE: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Conference. Kidney Int 98: 294–309, <DATE>.
doi:10.1016/<URL>nt.2020.04.020. [PubMed: 32709292]
31. Sawka MN, Burke LM, Eichner ER, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Stachenfeld NS; American College
of Sports Medicine, American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid
replacement. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39: 377-390, 2007. doi:10.1249/mss.0b013e31802ca597.
[PubMed: 17277604]
32. <PERSON>, Cote TR, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Rubenstein LZ, Smith DA, Stefanacci
RG, <PERSON>, Morley JE; Dehydration Council. Understanding clinical dehydration and its
treatment. J Am Med Dir Assoc 9: 292–301, 2008. <PERSON>/j.jamda.2008.03.006. [PubMed:
18519109]
33. Kosaki K, Kumamoto S, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON> T, <PERSON> T, Akari S, <PERSON>
T, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON> oxidoreductase activity in marathon runners:
potential implications for marathon-induced acute kidney injury. <PERSON> (<DATE>) 133: 1–10,
2022. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00669.2021. [PubMed: 35608201]
34. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Bains S, Grimaldi R, <PERSON> R, <PERSON>,
Hodgson LE. Marathon running and cell-cycle arrest biomarkers of acute kidney injury. J Sci Med
Sport 26: 14–18, <DATE>. doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2022.10.012. [PubMed: 36435729]
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
35. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Parsons IT, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Grimaldi R, <PERSON>, <PERSON> A,
House C, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>. Relative changes in brain and kidney biomarkers
with exertional heat illness during a cool weather marathon. PLoS One 17: e0263873, <DATE>.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.<PHONE>. [PubMed: 35176088]
36. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Pata RW, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Parikh CR. Kidney injury and repair
biomarkers in marathon runners. Am <PERSON>: 252–261, <DATE> [Erratum in Am J Kidney
Dis 70: 452, <DATE>]. doi:10.1053/j.ajkd.2017.01.045. [PubMed: 28363731]
37. McCullough PA, Chinnaiyan KM, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Gold JM, <PERSON>.
Changes in renal markers and acute kidney injury after marathon running. Nephrology (Carlton)
16: 194–199, <DATE>. doi:10.1111/j.1440-1797.2010.01354.x. [PubMed: 21272132]
38. <PERSON>, <PERSON> OR, <PERSON>, Hill N, Parsons IT, Woods D. Changes in gastrointestinal cell
integrity after marathon running and exercise-associated collapse. Eur J Appl Physiol 121: 11791187, <DATE>. doi:10.1007/s00421-021-04603-w. [PubMed: 33512586]
39. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON> The effect of
arginine or glycine supplementation on gastrointestinal function, muscle injury, serum amino acid
concentrations and performance during a marathon run. Int J Sports Med 20: 315-321, <DATE>.
doi:10.1055/s-2007-<MEDICAL_LICENSE_ID>. [PubMed: 10452229]
40. <PERSON>, Sparks AS, <PERSON>, Fleming SC, Langan-Evans C, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Close
GL. <DATE> of probiotic supplementation reduces GI symptoms during a marathon race. Eur J
Appl Physiol 119: 1491–1501, <DATE>. doi:10.1007/s00421-019-04136-3. [PubMed: 30982100]
41. <PERSON>, Lambert GP, Murray R, <PERSON>, Horn M, Gisolfi CV. Intestinal permeability
in runners in the <DATE> Chicago marathon. Int J Sport Nutr 9: 426–433, <DATE>. doi:10.1123/
ijsn.9.4.426. [PubMed: 10660873]

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 14 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 14
42. <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Magennis K, <PERSON>, <PERSON> Is there a sex difference in
the age of elite marathon runners? Med Sci Sports Exerc 43: 656-664, <DATE>. doi:10.1249/
MSS.0b013e3181fb4e00. [PubMed: 20881885]
43. Cutrufello PT, Dixon CB, <PERSON>. Hydration assessment among marathoners using urine
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
specific gravity and bioelectrical impedance analysis. Res Sports Med 24: 234-242, <DATE>.
doi:10.1080/15438627.2016.1202831. [PubMed: 27373703]
44. Eijsvogels TM, <PERSON>, Maessen MF, <PERSON>, <PERSON>, Hopman MT, Thijssen
DH. Predictors of cardiac troponin release after a marathon. J Sci Med Sport 18: 88-92, <DATE>.
doi:10.1016/<PERSON>. [PubMed: 24440407]
Health Research Alliance Author <PERSON> (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 15 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 15

<.001
.507
Δ TIMP-2 x IGFBP7 [ng/mL]<sup>2</sup>/1000
.835
∆ TIMP-2 x IGFBP7 [ng/mL]<sup>2</sup>/1000
TIMP-2 x IGFBP7 [ng/mL]<sup>2</sup>/1000
150
150
150 -
75
100
100
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
60 -
50
50
40
0
n
20 -
0
-50
-50
EuH
Males
Post-race
**Females**
HyH
Pre-race
<.001
300
300
225-
.212
.434
///4
75
A NGAL (ng/mL)
A NGAL (ng/mL)
200
200
NGAL (ng/mL)
60
100
100
40
0
0
20
-100
0
-100·
EuH
Post-race
Males
**Females**
HyH
Pre-race
<.001
15
15
12-
.243
.367
A KIM-1 (ng/mL)
A KIM-1 (ng/mL)
10
10
9
KIM-1 (ng/mL)
5
5
6

3
0

-5
-5
0
EuH
Pre-race
Males
HyH
Post-race
**Females**
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Figure 1.
Markers of acute kidney injury risk at pre- and postrace. Data are shown as means <math>\pm</math>
standard deviation with individual data. Urine biomarkers were normalized to urine specific
gravity using the Levine-Feyh equation with a reference urine specific gravity of 1.020.
Cutoffs for euhydrated (EuH) and hypohydrated (HyH) were urine specific gravity of 1.020
or plasma osmolality of 300 mosmol/kgH2O. Data were analyzed using either paired or
unpaired t tests (two-tailed). <math>n = 30</math> males; <math>n = 30</math> females; <math>n = 24</math> euhydrated; <math>n = 36</math>
hypohydrated. IGFBP7, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7; KIM-1, kidney injury
molecule-1; NGAL, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin; TIMP-2, tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase 2.

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 16 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 16
A TIMP-2 x IGFBP7 [ng/mL]<sup>2</sup>/1000
ANOVA p=.054
22500
ANOVA p=.738
150
A IFABP (pg/mL)
15000
100
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
7500
50

0
0

-7500
-50
18-39
40-59
≥ 60
18-39
40-59
≥ 60
Age group (years)
Age group (years)

8000
ANOVA p=.190
300
ANOVA p=.483
A sCD14 (pg/mL)
A NGAL (ng/mL)
4000
200
100

4000
-8000
-100
18-39
40-59
18-39
40-59
≥ 60
≥ 60
Age group (years)
Age group (years)

ANOVA p=.202
1500
ANOVA p=.699
15
A KIM-1 (ng/mL)
1000
10
A CK (U/L)
500
5

0
0

-500
-5
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
40-59
18-39
40-59
18-39
≥ 60
≥ 60
Age group (years)
Age group (years)
Figure 2.
Baseline or prerace to postrace changes in biomarkers of organ stress/injury across young
(<DATE>), middle aged (<DATE>), and older (≥60 <DATE>) adults. Data are shown as means
± standard deviation with individual data. Plasma and serum biomarkers were corrected
for changes in plasma volume. Urine biomarkers were normalized to urine specific gravity
using the Levine-Feyh equation with a reference urine specific gravity of 1.020. Data were
analyzed using one-way ANOVA. Blood biomarkers (IFABP, sCD14, and CK): <math>n = 15</math>,
<DATE>; <math>n</math> = 29, <DATE>; <math>n</math> = 16, ≥60 <DATE>. Urine biomarkers (TIMP-2 × IGFBP7, NGAL,
and KIM-1): <math>n = 15</math>, <DATE>; <math>n = 30</math>, <DATE>; <math>n = 15</math>, <<PERSON> 60</math> yr. CK, creatine kinase; IFABP,
intestinal fatty acid binding protein; IGFBP7, insulin-like growth factor binding protein
7; KIM-1, kidney injury molecule-1; NGAL, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin;
sCD14, soluble cluster of differentiation 14; TIMP-2, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2.

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 17 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 17
<.001
.306
.968
20000
22500
22500
A IFABP (pg/mL)
A IFABP (pg/mL)
15000
15000
15000
IFABP (pg/mL)
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
10000
7500
7500
5000
0
0
-7500
-7500
0
Post-race
Males
**Females**
EuH
Baseline
HyH
.007
8000
8000 -
8000 -
.693
.726
A sCD14 (pg/mL)
A sCD14 (pg/mL)
6000
4000
4000
sCD14 (pg/mL)
4000
0
0
2000
4000
4000
-8000
-8000
0
Post-race
EuH
Males
HyH
Baseline
**Females**
1500 -
.099
.446
1600
1500 -
<.001
1200
1000
1000
A CK (U/L)
A CK (U/L)
CK (U/L)
800
500
500
400
0
0
-500·
-500
0
Baseline
Males
EuH
Post-race
Females
HyH
Figure 3.
Markers of intestinal barrier injury and skeletal muscle damage at baseline and postrace.
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Data are shown as means <math>\pm</math> standard deviation with individual data. Plasma and serum
biomarkers were corrected for changes in plasma volume. Cutoffs for euhydrated (EuH)
and hypohydrated (HyH) were urine specific gravity of 1.020 or plasma osmolality of 300
<math><PERSON>/kgH_2O</math>. Data were analyzed using either paired or unpaired <math>t</math> tests (two-tailed). <math>n</math>
= 31 males; <math>n</math> = 29 females; <math>n</math> = 24 euhydrated; <math>n</math> = 36 hypohydrated. CK, creatine kinase;
IFABP, intestinal fatty acid binding protein; sCD14, soluble cluster of differentiation 14.

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 18 -->

Page 18
<PERSON> et al.
Data are means <math>\pm</math> standard deviation [minimum-maximum]. Females reported post- or perimenopausal, <math>n = 6</math>, no birth control, <math>n = 18</math>, oral contraceptive, <math>n = 2</math>, copper or hormonal intrauterine device, <math>n = 10</math>, and hy
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
P Value
0.910
0.945
0.457
0.260
<<PERSON> \pm 0.32 [2.38 - 4.45]</math>
<PERSON>, <math>n = 40</math>
<math>169 \pm 8 [152 - 187]</math>
<math>51 \pm 11 [30-70]</math>
<math>64 \pm 9 [48-82]</math>
<math>3.50 \pm 0.32 \, [3.00 – 5.24]</math>
<PERSON>, <math>n = 32</math>
170 ± 11 [152-193]
<math>64 \pm 11 [49-91]</math>
49 ± 12 [24-66]
P Value
0.015
0.015
0.005
0.048
Table 1.
<math>3.54 \pm 0.31</math> [2.56–5.24]
<math>167 \pm 9 [152 - 187]</math>
<math>61 \pm 10 [49 - 85]</math>
Females, <math>n = 38</math>
<DATE> [24-70]
Health Research Alliance Author M
<math>3.35 \pm 0.30 [2.38 - 4.44]</math>
<math>172 \pm 9 [152 - 193]</math>
53 ± 11 [32-66]
<math>67 \pm 9 [48-91]</math>
Males, <math>n = 34</math>
<math>3:45 \pm 0:32 [2:38-5:24]</math>
Aggregate, <math>n = 72</math>
<math>169 \pm 9 [152 - 193]</math>
<math>64 \pm 10 [48-91]</math>
<math>50 \pm 11 [24-70]</math>
Participant demographics
lanuscript
Finish time, h:min
Weight, kg
Height, cm
Age, yr

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 19 -->

Page 19
<PERSON> et al.
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Mostly Cloudy
Partly Cloudy
Partly Cloudy
Partly Cloudy
Partly Cloudy
Partly Cloudy
Mostly Cloud
Partly Cloudy
Condition
Wind<br>Direction
SSW
SW
Ν
≥
≥
≥
≥
S
Wind Speed, m/s
2.2
4.5
8.9
3.6
2.7
6.3
9.4
6.7
Heat Index, °C
16.3
15.3
18.3
20.2
21.1
20.1
13.3
21.1
Table 2.
Data from <URL>
Wet Bulb Temperature, °C
12
12
13
13
12
12
12
Ξ
Environmental conditions in Boston, MA on <DATE> (<DATE>)
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Relative Humidity, %
64
58
39
35
51
31
31
70
Air Temperature, °C
17
19
21<br>22
16
22
7
<DATE> (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 20 -->

<PERSON> et al.
Page 20
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Interaction
0.810
0.570
0.716
0.731
0.121
0.583
0.174
0.278
0.171
0.121
LMM P Value
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.008
0.046
0.189
0.670
0.563
0.199
Sex
Table 3.
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.225
0.265
<0.001
0.252
<0.001
Time
Females, <math>n = 33</math>
<math>1.26 \pm 0.04</math>
<math>1.16 \pm 0.07</math>
<math>13.9 \pm 0.6</math>
<math display="block">4.2\pm0.4</math>
<math display="block">1.4\pm0.3</math>
<math>13.9 \pm 1.1</math>
<math display="block">4.1\pm0.4</math>
<math display="block">133\pm30</math>
<math display="block">0.8\pm0.1</math>
<math display="block">96\pm15</math>
<math display="block">101\pm2</math>
<math>102 \pm 4</math>
<math>141 \pm 2</math>
<math>142 \pm 3</math>
<math>18 \pm 5</math>
<math>41 \pm 2</math>
<math>41 \pm 3</math>
<math>15 \pm 4</math>
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Blood and urine analysis at baseline or prerace and postrace
Males, <math>n = 34</math>
<math>1.16 \pm 0.06</math>
<math>1.25 \pm 0.04</math>
<math>14.9 \pm 0.7</math>
<math>15.2 \pm 1.0</math>
<math display="block">4.2\pm0.3</math>
<math display="block">4.2\pm0.4</math>
<math display="block">1.0\pm0.2</math>
<math display="block">1.6\pm0.3</math>
<math>123 \pm 27</math>
<math>103 \pm 3</math>
<math>141 \pm 2</math>
<math>143 \pm 2</math>
<math>101 \pm 2</math>
<math>96 \pm 12</math>
<math>23 \pm 5</math>
<math>19 \pm 4</math>
<math>44 \pm 2</math>
<math>45 \pm 3</math>
Aggregate, <math>n = 67</math>
<math>1.25 \pm 0.04</math>
<math>1.16 \pm 0.07</math>
<math>14.4 \pm 0.8</math>
<math>14.5 \pm 1.2</math>
<math>4.2 \pm 0.4</math>
<math display="block">128\pm28</math>
<math display="block">0.9\pm0.2</math>
<math display="block">1.5\pm0.4</math>
<math>101 \pm 2</math>
<math>103 \pm 3</math>
<math display="block">96\pm13</math>
<math>141 \pm 2</math>
<math>142 \pm 2</math>
<math>4.1 \pm 0.4</math>
<math>17 \pm 5</math>
<math>20 \pm 6</math>
<math>42 \pm 2</math>
<math>43 \pm 4</math>
Plasma osmolality, <PERSON>/kgH2O
Ionized calcium, mmol/L
Potassium, mEq/L
Hemoglobin, g/dL
Creatinine, mg/dL
Chloride, mEq/L
Sodium, mEq/L
Glucose, mg/dL
Hematocrit, %
BUN, mg/dL
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Postrace
Postrace
Baseline
Postrace
Baseline
Postrace
Postrace
Postrace
Postrace
Postrace
Baseline
Baseline
Baseline
Postrace

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 21 -->

Page 21
<PERSON> et al.
Baseline samples were collected in <DATE> before the race, whereas prerace samples were collected just before the start of the race. Data were analyzed using linear mixed-effects models with main effects of time, sex, an
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
Interaction
0.580
0.864
LMM P Value
0.069
0.087
Sex
<0.001
0.804
Time
Females, <math>n = 33</math>
<math>1.007 \pm 0.008</math>
<math>1.015 \pm 0.007</math>
<math>317 \pm 211</math>
<math>341 \pm 138</math>
<math display="block">291\pm5</math>
<math>298 \pm 6</math>
Health Research Alliance Author M
Males, <math>n = 34</math>
<math>1.017 \pm 0.020</math>
<math>1.011 \pm 0.009</math>
<math>403 \pm 259</math>
<math>394 \pm 170</math>
<math display="block">294\pm5</math>
<math>300 \pm 6</math>
Aggregate, <math>n = 67</math>
<math>1.017 \pm 0.015</math>
<math>1.009 \pm 0.007</math>
<math display="block">366\pm155</math>
<math>358 \pm 237</math>
<math>293 \pm 5</math>
<math>299 \pm 6</math>
Urine osmolality, <PERSON>/kgH2O
lanuscript
Postrace
Postrace
Baseline
Postrace
USG, AU
Prerace
Prerace

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 <DATE>.

<!-- PAGE: 22 -->

Page 22
<PERSON> et al.
Total GI symptom score is the total amount of symptoms reported across 13 different areas on a 10-point scale (0 = no problems at all and 9 = the worst it has ever been) with a maximum score of 117. Data between males and
Health Research Alliance Author Manuscript
P Value
0.518
969.0
0.426
0.142
0.497
0.768
0.180
Hypohydrated, <math>n = 40</math>
2 [0-29]
0 [0-7]
0 [0-3]
5 [0-9]
0 [0-7]
0 [0-9]
4 [0-9]
Euhydrated, <math>n = 32</math>
4 [0-43]
Table 4.
0 [0-9]
<math>0[0-1]</math>
5 [0-9]
<math>0[0-5]</math>
2 [0-9]
0 [0-8]
P Value
0.750
0.460
0.416
0.992
0.912
0.258
0.707
Health Research Alliance Author M
Females, <math>n = 37</math>
3 [0-21]
0 [0-6]
0 [0-3]
2 [0-9]
4 [0-9]
<math>[6-0]0</math>
0 [0-7]
Subjective symptoms experienced during the race
Males, <math>n = 35</math>
2 [0-43]
0 [0-3]
[8-0] 9
0 [0-9]
3 [0-9]
9-0]0
0 [0-7]
Aggregate, <math>n = 72</math>
2 [0-43]
0 [0-9]
0 [0-3]
5 [0-9]
2 [0-9]
0 [0-7]
0 [0-9]
Total GI symptom score
lanuscript
Muscle weakness
Muscle cramps
Tingling arms
Tingling legs
Headache
Dizziness

J Appl Physiol (<DATE>). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 21.